Title: Throw Some Gouda at that Whine: Valleywag Post + Bay Area Charity Pairings
Date: 2013-12-12 15:39
Slug: throw-some-gouda-at-that-whine-valleywag-post-plus-bay-area-charity-pairings

I love the spiteful tingle I get from reading on
[Valleywag](http://valleywag.gawker.com/) about the latest gross
boomtown excess coming out of Silicon Valley or the most recent hateful
tirade spewed publicly by a clueless startup douche. What better match
for that warm hate-glow than the happy satisfaction of helping a worthy
nonprofit? Here’s the 12 most recent posts on Valleywag as of 12/12/13,
each paired with a relevant local organization that’s working to do good
in the Bay Area and beyond. It’s a Choose Your Own Rage Gift Adventure!


[Bitstrips, Universally Hated Facebook Spam Company, Bags $3
Million](http://valleywag.gawker.com/bitstrips-universally-hated-facebook-spam-company-bag-1481904581):
This one was a ZAP! POW! BAM! no-brainer: the **[Cartoon Art
Museum](http://cartoonart.org/)** in downtown SF is dedicated to the
preservation and exhibition of cartoon art in all its forms, and not
only runs an awesome physical museum but has an active education program
and serves as an archive & research facility.

[Snapchat only raised $50 million in series
C](http://valleywag.gawker.com/after-all-that-jazz-snapchat-confirmed-to-techcrunch-t-1481483714):
You and I may be too old to know what base “sending self-destructing
nude photos” counts as these days, but you better believe **[HIFY:
Health Initiatives For Youth](http://www.hify.org/)** is up on it. They
work to improve the health, especially sexual health, and well-being of
underserved young people through youth-led direct intervention efforts,
educator training & popular advocacy. If you have a teenage girl in your
life you owe it to her to find a way to get her their [Young Woman’s
Survival Guide](http://www.hify.org/publications/guides.html).

[Airbnb’s Industry Mouthpiece Astroturfs for
Donations](http://valleywag.gawker.com/airbnbs-industry-mouthpiece-astroturfs-for-donations-1481305550) -
This one was a tricky one, since there’s so much insidiously and
complicatedly wrong with this particular corporate foray into politics,
but how about **[La Cocina](http://www.lacocinasf.org/)**, a nonprofit
culinary incubator that focuses on getting low-income women’s small
businesses off the ground legally, sustainably, and in a way that
directly benefits their communities? More broadly, the **[Opportunity
Fund](http://www.opportunityfund.org/)** is California’s largest
non-profit microlender and funds everything from small businesses to
college tuition to real-estate investment for working-class California
families.

[You Shouldn’t Want To Live in Uber’s Lazy
Utopia](http://valleywag.gawker.com/you-shouldnt-want-to-live-in-ubers-lazy-utopia-1481194759):
The hardworking 16-21-year-olds at **[New Door
Ventures](http://www.newdoor.org/)** are not the types who know from
instant gratification. Thankfully, they’ve been able to access a pretty
amazing community that provides job training, life skills education, and
paid internship experience at community businesses, including the
nonprofit businesses owned and operated by New Door (you may already be
a customer!)

[Surprise: No One Graduates from Internet
Schools](http://valleywag.gawker.com/surprise-no-one-graduates-from-internet-schools-1481133298):
One of the most galling details of this story was the underreported
massive failures of several of these MOOC’s programs in underserved
schools. If you’re looking for people making a real impact in this
arena, the Kapor Center’s **[Level Playing Field
Institute](http://www.lpfi.org/)** both runs practical programs and
funds research to eliminate the barriers faced by underrepresented
people of color in STEM.

[Happy Holidays: Startup CEO Complains SF Is Full of Human
Trash](http://valleywag.gawker.com/the-flip-side-of-reviling-the-needy-as-human-trash-fai-1481109898):
The crapshow that inspired this post! There’s a TON to work with here;
SFist created [one good
list](http://sfist.com/2013/12/11/techies_need_to_give.php). I’ve
already shilled pretty hard for **[Tenderloin Neighborhood Development
Corporation](http://www.tndc.org/)**, a nonprofit housing developer that
builds affordable housing and has pioneered supportive housing services
in the Tenderloin. (Full disclosure: my mom works there & is a total
fucking badass.) Another organization working on large scale solutions
is **[Mercy Housing](https://www.mercyhousing.org/)**, another huge
low-income & supportive housing provider in CA. You might also work the
angle of sticking it to AngelHack’s CEO by supporting actually useful
hackathons like **[TransHack](http://www.transhack.org/)** or **[Level
the Coding Field](http://www.lpfi.org/hackathon)**.

[Foursquare now passively notifies
you](http://valleywag.gawker.com/foursquares-brilliant-new-update-which-offers-passive-1480520241):
Much like Foursquare is now delivering you recommendations where you
are, **[Project Open Hand](http://www.openhand.org/)** delivers healthy
meals & groceries to seniors & the critically ill.

[The World’s New Least Favorite App:
“Circle”](http://valleywag.gawker.com/the-worlds-new-least-favorite-app-circle-1480567495):
this is a bit of a stretch, but
**[Aspiration](http://aspirationtech.org/)**’s goal is to connect
non-profit organizations with software solutions that help them better
carry out their work, including social media management tools to
responsibly up their visibility.

[Sean Parker Goes On Spotify Benders to Curate His “Hipster”
Playlist](http://valleywag.gawker.com/sean-parker-goes-on-spotify-benders-to-curate-his-hips-1480437961):
**[KPOO](http://kpoo.com/)** in SF is a noncommercial radio station
owned & operated by people of color that produces huge amounts of
original content & has played an active role in local music promotion &
production since the 70s. **[KFJC](http://www.kfjc.org/)**, the radio
station for Los Altos College, has a rich history in the local
underground/experimental music scene & is threatened by community
college budget cuts.

[Larry Ellison’s Billionaire Yacht Race Cost San Francisco $5.5
Million](http://valleywag.gawker.com/larry-ellisons-billionaire-yacht-race-cost-san-francis-1480392429):
**[Save The Bay](http://www.savesfbay.org/)** literally kept Berkeley
from paving over the SF Bay in 1961 and continues to work to restore
tidal marsh and keep the Bay a thriving public resource.

[Tech “Advisor” Lindsay Lohan Is Hosting a VIP Party for a Startup](http://valleywag.gawker.com/tech-advisor-lindsay-lohan-is-hosting-a-vip-party-for-1480358404):
Providing Just Sing It, Lindsay’s terrible app, doesn’t put their
profession out of work, **[Women’s Audio
Mission](http://www.womensaudiomission.org/)** is dedicated to the
advancement of women in music production and the recording arts by
providing hands-on training, experience, career counseling and job
placement to women and girls in media technology.

[Silicon Valley Kings Write Half-Assed Outrage Letter to
NSA](http://valleywag.gawker.com/silicon-valley-kings-write-half-assed-outrage-letter-to-1479929649):
**[EFF](https://www.eff.org/)**, duh.

Suggest some pairings of your own in the comments!

