Title: Why I'm Glad For Lambda Ladies
Date: 2013-04-03 15:45
Slug: why-im-glad-for-lambda-ladies

Earlier this week, an awesome group of women that I’m a part of started
[Lambda Ladies](http://www.lambdaladies.com/), a group for women
interested in functional programming. I’m really excited about it,
especially the email list which already has far more FP women than I
would’ve even thought existed! The response so far has been pretty
overwhelmingly positive, but I also saw some skepticism on Twitter about
the need for such a group and I wanted to give a little background about
why I think it’s a good idea.

##### What does gender have to do with functional programming?

I actually think there are some tendencies specific to the functional
programming community that make me excited about Lambda Ladies, but I’m
pretty sure I reached my quota of arguments over the semantics of the
word “neckbeard” a few months ago. Instead, I’d like to talk about a
benefit of women-specific groups: providing mentorship to young women
developers. As someone who’s just emerging from the
holy-crap-I-have-a-real-job-how-do-I-keep-them-from-finding-out-I’m-an-idiot
stage of post-college terror, mentorship is on my mind a lot. I’m
realizing that unlike almost everything else in programming, you can’t
look up how to get where you want in your career on Stack Overflow.
Personal advice and connections from someone with specific knowledge of
the field you’re working in are critical, and I’ve come to see women’s
lists and meetups as excellent sources for finding mentorship.

##### Why does a mentor have to be a woman? You’re never going to find a mentor exactly like you, why not an empathetic person of any gender?

Well, sometimes experience trumps empathy, and it can be surprisingly
difficult to figure out who is empathetic ahead of time. But mostly, I
agree with this idea. Yay for supportive men! Personally, I’m definitely
open to support from any source and am extremely grateful to everyone
who’s helped me so far in my career. It would be downright silly to
limit my pool of potential mentors to only women, especially considering
how low the percentage of women in tech is and how that percentage drops
even lower the higher up the career chain you go.

Here’s the thing, though. Mentorship rarely takes the form of a formal
program with delineated boundaries. Mentorship is formed through
personal connection and ideally sustained over an extended period. It
happens in private interaction and social networks. Coffee after work,
jokey Twitter conversations, drinks at conferences.

And the part that’s hard to write: those things happening between a less
experienced, often younger woman and a more experienced man are not read
as neutral. One obvious way is when women’s professional overtures (or
communication at all!) to men are mistaken for romantic ones. I have
only anecdotal evidence, but it seems to happen far more commonly among
programmers than in other fields. Lest you think I’m a particularly
flirty networker/coworker/meeting participant, this is common enough to
be
[something](https://twitter.com/OnlyGirlInTech/status/295321645927784448)
[of
a](http://agentfin.tumblr.com/post/46712547856/the-ux-of-community-in-contested-space)
[trope](http://femalesoftwareeng.tumblr.com/post/43572117763/when-a-guy-assumes-im-at-a-tech-event-to-hit-on).

That’s creepy misbehavior and it needs to stop. But maybe more insidious
is the way that even the most aboveboard professional interactions have
the potential–maybe the probability–to be misinterpreted by other
people. I know at least two women who’ve been accused of “sleeping their
way to the top” due to their closeness to successful male mentors. I’ve
been turned down for one-on-one lunch in the office before because it
wouldn’t look right. It’s an obstacle to finding mentorship that my male
peers simply don’t have to worry about, and one that I feel the need to
balance with more active efforts towards building positive and almost
aggressively strictly professional relationships with experienced people
in my field.

Is this unique to women programmers? Certainly it’s a potential issue in
any mixed-gender field, but I think the scarcity of women in tech make
it much more acute for us. Because there are so few women in the field,
there just isn’t yet widely-accepted protocol covering cross-gender
professional interactions between programmers.

If you’re curious, by the way, this is why some of us are so insistent
that the sexualizing of professional technical environments has to stop.
It’s not that we’re prudes or humorless–if you knew me personally, you
could attest that I like a good dick joke or elaborate porn metaphor as
much as the next person (probably more, because I have the sense of
humor of a 12 year old. Go ahead and try to have a serious conversation
about database sharding around me.) But I cringe every time I see this
kind of thing publicly exhibited and defended by respected people in
tech, because it’s actively contributing to the perception that all
interactions between men and women are sexual, and that perception
combined with the dearth of experienced women mean fewer opportunities
for professional growth for me.

#### But that’s unfair/limiting/heterosexist/paranoid!

Yes, absolutely! Oh, imaginary interlocutor, I’m so glad we agree on
this point. It’s totally not right. And I hope I never stop doing what I
can to change it, both in the general–by challenging heteronormativity,
structural sexism, and objectification–and in the particular, by working
to increase the number and visibility of technical women and modelling
awesome, productive professional relationships with the men around me.

But you know that old saw about just because you’re paranoid doesn’t
mean they aren’t out to get you? I don’t have the luxury of working
right now in the welcoming, diverse computing field I’d like to see and
hope to help build. Instead, I work in a field where many (but not all,
thankfully!) participants consider a close relationship between a man
and a women to be sexual or romantic by default, and I work in a field
where women are highly visible by default because of how few of us there
are. And, unfortunately, I work in a field where women’s perceived
missteps are punished harshly and quickly.

Sometimes that takes the form of public attacks and threats. Sometimes,
and probably more often, it takes the form of being let go for [not
being a culture
fit](http://blog.prettylittlestatemachine.com/blog/2013/02/20/what-your-culture-really-says)
or being transferred off challenging projects because your supervisor
feels you have rejected his advances, or any one of a million other ways
to derail your plans. How do I know this? I know this because other
women have written about their experiences of these things, and because
they’ve shared them with me (often on the lists that this post is
about!)

There’s been talk lately of whether sharing bad experiences as technical
women is a good idea or not, since it could potentially scare women away
from computing. I’m so glad that they’re being shared, because if I’m
going to avoid being one of the [56% of women who leave tech at or
before reaching mid-level in their
careers](http://www.ncwit.org/resources/women-it-facts), I need
realistic information about what actually happens in our field. If I’m
going to “lean in”/stay on my grind/be part of turning that statistic
around, I have to be practical.

So, am I going to stop pursuing professional connections and learning
opportunities with men in my field? No way. But am I going to do so
carefully with an awareness of the way these relationships and others’
perception of them could hurt my career? Absolutely. And if an
opportunity comes along to build mentoring relationships without having
to worry about these minefields, am I going to jump on that faster than
quicksort with a good choice of pivot? Oh HELL yeah.

If the question is “what does gender have to do with writing functional
code?” then the answer, obviously, is nothing. But if the question is
“what does gender have to do with learning, finding jobs, and making a
career writing functional code?” then the answer is many, many things.
Counter-intuitively, rather than highlighting gender, groups like
[Lambda Ladies](http://www.lambdaladies.com/) provide an opportunity for
me to seek out mentorship *without* having to think about gender.